add getting started guide for the openapi connector (#928)
hasura/ddn-docs: docs/how-to-build-with-ddn/with-openapi.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 7
sidebar_label: With OpenAPI
description: "Learn the basics of Hasura DDN and how to get started with HTTP APIs using OpenAPI."
keywords:
  - hasura ddn
  - graphql api
  - getting started
  - guide
  - openapi
  - open api
  - http api
  - rest api
  - restful api
  - custom api
---

import Prereqs from "@site/docs/_prereqs.mdx";

# Get Started with Hasura DDN and OpenAPI

## Overview

> This tutorial takes about fifteen minutes to complete. You'll learn how to:

Reviewer: I feel like because this is a bit of a different connector we should lead with some information about what it does and how it works. something like:

```
The Hasura OpenAPI connector allows you to seamlessly integrate HTTP APIs defined in OpenAPI (formerly Swagger) specifications into your Hasura GraphQL API. This connector works by:

1. Reading your OpenAPI Document (either from a URL or local file)
2. Generating TypeScript code that represents your API endpoints and types
3. Converting these HTTP endpoints into GraphQL queries and mutations
4. Exposing them through Hasura's DDN's GraphQL API

This means you can:
- Connect to any REST API that provides an OpenAPI specification
- Transform REST endpoints into GraphQL operations automatically
- Combine these APIs with other data sources in your Hasura project
- Apply Hasura's permission system to control access to these endpoints
```

Author: resolved in [99bd8d2](https://github.com/hasura/ddn-docs/pull/928/commits/99bd8d2bd06f3d310a45210168c76ddca2b23b46)

- Generate Hasura metadata
- Create a build
- Run your first query

Additionally, we'll familiarize you with the steps and workflows necessary to iterate on your API.

This tutorial assumes you're starting from scratch. We will use the [Petstore API](https://petstore3.swagger.io/) in
this tutorial, but you can use any OpenAPI document.

<Prereqs />

## Tutorial

### Step 1. Authenticate your CLI

```sh title="Before you can create a new Hasura DDN project, you need to authenticate your CLI:"
ddn auth login
```

This will launch a browser window prompting you to log in or sign up for Hasura DDN. After you log in, the CLI will
acknowledge your login, giving you access to Hasura Cloud resources.

### Step 2. Scaffold out a new local project

```sh title="Next, create a new local project:"
ddn supergraph init my-project && cd my-project
```

Once you move into this directory, you'll see your project scaffolded out for you. You can view the structure by either
running `ls` in your terminal, or by opening the directory in your preferred editor.

### Step 3. Initialize your OpenAPI connector

```sh title="In your project directory, run:"
ddn connector init my_openapi -i
```

> From the dropdown, start typing `openapi` and hit enter to accept the default port. Then, provide the following values:

Reviewer: Connector doesn't ask for port. Also, can we just have a line about the values for each of the NDC_OAS_LAMBDA_PRETTY_LOGS and NDC_OAS_FILE_OVERWRITE variables and what they do. Eg: 

The NDC_OAS_LAMBDA_PRETTY_LOGS environment variable shows more human readable logs in the output. 
The NDC_OAS_FILE_OVERWRITE environment variable tells the OpenAPI connector to overwrite existing generated files when re-introspecting your OpenAPI Document.

Author: Resolved in [0c04764](https://github.com/hasura/ddn-docs/pull/928/commits/0c047644947ee855bc56ee3162defb83c8d673e4)

ddn connector introspect my_openapi
```

Running this command results in the creation of a few files in `app/connector/my_openapi`. Let's break it down:

`api.ts` - This file is generated using the OpenAPI document and is a direct represntation of it in Typescript. It
contains the generated TypeScript client for the OpenAPI document. It also contains all the types (schemas) that are
defined in the OpenAPI document, alongwith all the API calls.

`functions.ts` - This file contains simple wrapper functions over the API calls that are defined in the `api.ts` file.
These functions will be exposed as queries and mutations in your DDN GraphQL API.

`tsconfig.json` - This file is the TypeScript configuration file for the generated code.

`package.json`, `package-lock.json` - These files are generated to manage the dependencies of the generated code.

You will also the a representation of the functions defined in `functions.ts` file in the `definition.schema` field of
the `app/connector/metadata/my_openapi.hml` file.

```sh title="Additionally, you can check which resources are available — and their status — at any point using the CLI:"
ddn connector show-resources my_openapi
```

> :::note
> 
> The OpenAPI Connector internally makes use of the TypeScript Lambda Connector to expose the generated code as a GraphQL
> API. Read more about the TypeScript Lambda Connector [here](../business-logic/add-a-lambda-connector.mdx).
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info Under the hood

The OpenAPI Connector internally makes use of the [TypeScript Lambda Connector](/business-logic/add-a-lambda-connector.mdx) to expose the generated code as a GraphQL API.

:::
```

### Step 5. Add your API

```sh title="Now, track an API from your OpenAPI Document as a command in your DDN metadata:"
ddn commands add my_openapi getStoreGetOrderById
```

Open the `app/metadata` directory and you'll find a newly-generated file: `GetStoreGetOrderById.hml`. The DDN CLI will
use this Hasura Metadata Language file to represent the `getStoreGetOrderById` function from `functions.ts` file as
[command](/reference/metadata-reference/commands.mdx). This function in turn represents the
`GET :/store/order/{orderId}` API in your OpenAPI Document.

> :::tip
> 
> You can import all APIs from your OpenAPI Document as commands by running `ddn command add my_openapi "*"`.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip Import all at once

You can import all the APIs from your OpenAPI Document as commands by running `ddn command add my_openapi "*"`.

:::
```

### Step 6. Create a new build

```sh title="To create a local build, run:"
ddn supergraph build local
```

The build is stored as a set of JSON files in `engine/build`.

### Step 7. Start your local services

```sh title="Start your local Hasura DDN Engine and OpenAPI connector:"
ddn run docker-start
```

Your terminal will be taken over by logs for the different services.

### Step 8. Run your first query

```sh title="In a new terminal tab, open your local console:"
ddn console --local
```

```graphql title="In the GraphiQL explorer of the console, write this query:"
query MyQuery {
  getStoreGetOrderById(orderId: 10) {
    complete
    id
    petId
    quantity
    shipDate
    status
  }
}
```

```json title="You'll get a similar response to the following:"
{
  "data": {
    "getStoreGetOrderById": {
      "complete": true,
      "id": 10,
      "petId": 198772,
      "quantity": 7,
      "shipDate": "2025-03-04T08:23:30.139+00:00",
      "status": "approved"
    }
  }
}
```

> :::note
> 
> The Petstore API is a public API and may have different data than what is shown here. Also, sometimes the API may not
> return data for certain IDs, or, the server may not be accepting requests at all. These will show as errors in the
> console.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note Petstore API considerations

The Petstore API is a public API and may have different data than what is shown here. Also, sometimes the API may not
return data for certain IDs, or, the server may not be accepting requests at all. These will show as errors in the
console.

:::
```

### Step 9. Iterate on your OpenAPI Document

If you have added new APIs to your OpenAPI Document, you can introspect it again to update your metadata. The OpenAPI
connector looks at the `NDC_OAS_FILE_OVERWRITE` to determine whether it should overwrite the existing `api.ts` and
`functions.ts` file or not. You'll need to set this to `true` in your project's `.env` file if you wish to get the new
changes from your OpenAPI Document into the generated TypeScript files.

#### Step 9.1 Set the NDC_OAS_FILE_OVERWRITE env var to true

> In your projects `.env` file, set the `APP_MY_OPENAPI_NDC_OAS_FILE_OVERWRITE` to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your projects `.env` file, make sure the the `APP_MY_OPENAPI_NDC_OAS_FILE_OVERWRITE` variable is set to `true`.
```

> ### Step 11. Refresh your metadata and rebuild your project

Reviewer: Missing Step 10

Author: resolved in [b43294c](https://github.com/hasura/ddn-docs/pull/928/commits/b43294cb58c71b7ebfca24c06e64cfae05f8d888)

> :::tip
> 
> The following steps are necessary each time you make changes to your `functions.ts` file. This includes adding,
> modifying, or deleting functions.
> 
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip Making changes

The following steps are necessary each time you make changes to your `functions.ts` file. This includes adding,
modifying, or deleting functions.

:::
```

#### Step 11.3. Update your metadata

```sh title="Add the new APIs as commands:"
ddn command add my_openapi "*"
```

Open the `app/metadata` directory and you'll find a newly-generated files for the new APIs.

#### Step 11.4. Create a new build

```sh title="Next, create a new build:"
ddn supergraph build local
```

#### Step 11.5 Restart your services

```sh title="Bring everything back up:"
ddn run docker-start
```

### Step 12. Query your new build

Your GraphQL API should now have the new APIs from your OpenAPI Document. You can query them in the console.

## Next steps

Congratulations on completing your first Hasura DDN project with HTTP APIs using OpenAPI! 🎉

Here's what you just accomplished:

- You started with a fresh project and connected it to HTTP APIs using an OpenAPI Document.
- You set up metadata to represent your HTTP APIs, which acts as the blueprint for your API.
- Then, you created a build — essentially compiling everything into a ready-to-use API — and successfully ran your first
  GraphQL queries to fetch data.
- Along the way, you learned how to iterate and refresh your metadata to reflect changes.

> Now, you're equipped to connect and expose your data, empowering you to iterate and scale with confidence. Great work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, you're equipped to connect and expose any data with an OpenAPI spec, empowering you to iterate and scale with confidence. Great work!
```
